Pintu!
Is that Bhombol?
Baba?
- Did you call him? - Who?
I told you a former student of
mine is now an eye specialist.
You think you'll get free glasses...
just because he was your pupil?
Well,
he might take it into consideration.
I told you, Baba.
I'll get you glasses as soon
as things improve a bit.
And what do you want?
- Bus ticket.
Ticket?
Here. One yellow, one black.
Yellow... black.
Why did you take Daddy's pen?
Let gm!
How long until your exam?
- Six weeks.
Did Baba tutor you? How long?
Two hours.
- Did he scold you?
What's the use of studying?
- What?
You'll end up with kitchen duty
like your sister-in-law here.
Poor girl.
- We learn that too.
What?
- How to cook.
- Domestic science.
Oh.
Is this how you neglect the earning
member of the family?
He's been home a while now.
What can I do? We ran out of tea.
I had to run over to the neighbors'.
You borrowed tea?
- What choice do I have?
If you don't have your tea when you
get home, you kick up a fuss.
Of course.
You pay no attention to appearances.
Some tea!
They're misers to the bone.
What was Baba asking about?
Glasses, as always.
Poor man.
He does those crossword
puzzles at night.
Not only do they cost money,
but he's ruining his eyes too.
The man has to have something to do.
He could tutor private
students again.
He's better now.
Thanks to your nursing.
I won't allow it.
Cover my head, please.
You think I want him to work?
But when I think of the family
- - By the way...
did you get Ma's scented tobacco?
She reminded you a few times.
Okay. I'll take care of that.
But you handle the problem
of Baba's glasses.
After all, he listens to you.
Drink this, Baba.
How much longer must I take this
bitter medicine of yours?
You've to take care of your health.
Oh, what use is this old body?
Oh God!
I still won't be able to work.
You could get out a bit...
and go visit the park in
the morning and evening.
I've gone to that park, my dear.
It's just a lot of rabble
who gather to gossip.
Even the older folks there...
do nothing but gossip
and criticize others.
I'd no idea Calcutta
had changed so much.
Will you talk to Bhombol?
About glasses?
Yes.
He won't listen to me these days.
He's changed somehow.
You won't listen either, Baba.
You sit up doing your crosswords
every night.
Some water?
- Yes.
Oh, my! Your eyes are so red.
I'll get some cool water.
These eyes...
Just splash it on your eyes.
Please get up a bit,
Ma, or you'll get a backache.
Let me cook the fish.
How are you preparing it?
- The way you like it, son.
Dum Pukhz (dish).
- Yes.
Then don't let her cook it.
We only have fish three
times a week as it is.
Fine, I'll prepare it.
But she cooks very well too.
All right, Ma...
but tomorrow you rest the whole day.
Are you going out?
Yes, to see my private student...
and see if he can pay up.
Would you get some change
from my coat pocket?
How's the household account?
There's enough for three days.
And we still owe two months'
tuition for Bani. - I know.
So...
- Listen.
Maybe we could ask your friend
Abani for a loan?
Don't you know their situation?
Some relatives came to stay...
so they're both working
to make ends meet.
What do you mean, both?
Husband and wife.
I'll be back by 8:30.
Don't pull so much, Ma.
Am I pulling or are you?
Bani.
Get him to fall asleep
in here from now on.
As he gets bigger...
carrying him from room to room...
Kids are heavier when they're
asleep, aren't they?
Bani, aren't you cold there?
- No.
If I am,
I just roll up in the blanket.
You hear me, dear?
Ma, Baba's calling you.
- I heard.
You hear me?
- For heaven's sake!
What are you shouting about?
Have you got any money?
Didn't I give you some
the other day?
You don't have any more?
I'm not the one who keeps
the money around here.
I thought maybe you'd
some set aside.
I suppose it's for another
crossword contest.
Addicted to such things at your age!
I just might win some money.
Don't tell me those stories.
I don't like it.
Why?
- Why?
Do any of your stories make
any practical sense?
When did money ever
come to us easily?
We're a burden on our son.
If we hadn't come here,
they wouldn't be in such straits.
Yet all you can think of is money...
and more money!
What am I supposed to do?
We have some claim on our son.
That's the schoolmaster's lot,
I suppose.
That's the way it is.
All your life you sweat...
trying to educate children...
sowing the seeds of knowledge
in their minds.
Then they go trotting off...
to become judges and magistrates...
leaving you like an ox
yoked to the mill.
So on one level...
I'm proud of my students...
but I'm jealous too.
There's an injustice
in it somewhere.
The Almighty's accounts are
out of balance somewhere.
You're feeling better now,
aren't you?
If I get lucky just once...
we'll leave all this behind...
and go to Cape Comorin.
There's a bridge there
that monkeys built.
We'll go see it with our own eyes.
Are you leaving?
This is the last time
I give you any money.
Fine, fine.
Someone can make a million
manufacturing cheap cigarettes...
but a bank employee with
a BA can only go bald...
worrying about finances.
What are you thinking about?
What does your friend's wife do?
- Why?
Where did that come from?
- Tell me.
She's a schoolteacher. Why?
I couldn't teach!
Teaching isn't...
What job could I get with
just one year of college?
Who told you to get a job?
So you don't think I can
- as usual! Let me by.
Good heavens! What did I say?
You don't want me to work?
Answer me. Well?
Keep me as your servant,
fair lady...
Hush!
One good thing about living
around here:...
no need to buy a radio.
Mr. Lion...
Well?
Tell me honestly.
- What?
Do you want me to work or don't you?
No.
- No what?
I don't want you to.
- You don't?
If you were a bit less attractive...
I might have wanted
you to get a job.
If a girl like you worked
in an office...
all the male employees'
output would drop.
There's a saying in English...
A woman's place...
is in the home.
You believe that?
- Yes.
I'm very conservative,
like my father.
A housewife should stay
in her house...
and not wander about.
Dear.
I'm going to get a job.
Did you hear what I said?
I'll get a job.
It's true.
It's not right for you to bear
all the responsibility.
I don't know why I didn't
see it earlier.
You work so hard...
going to the office...
and tutoring private students.
Everything you earn you
turn over to me...
keeping nothing for yourself.
And what do I do?
I never saw how you were suffering.
No.
Things can't go on like this.
I'll get a job.
Any job I can get with my education.
What do you think?
What on earth?
- What?
Let me sleep.
Wanted: New faces. Boys...
Wanted: an M.Com.
- Brother...
your bathwater's ready.
Wanted immediately: a whole-time
lady doctor...
Brother.
- MBBS.
What are you looking at?
Sultan for a Day, Robin Hood...
You're going to the movies?
- What's it to you?
By yourselves?
Couldn't we all go in two months?
What's it say here?
Wanted.
Wanted a girl who can
keep her mouth shut.
Listen.
I'm looking for a job...
but not a word to anyone.
If anyone finds out, then...
You mean Ma and Baba?
- Now beat it.
What kind of job?
- Nothing's definite yet.
I've got it.
Film star! You'd be perfect.
Dark glasses,
lots of red lipstick...
and 100,000 rupees per picture.
And if it's a Hindi film,
we'll all fly to Bombay.
Something is burning in the kitchen.
Go on.
- No, you go.
And you study domestic science?
Beat it!
Listen to this.
- What?
Come here a minute.
Listen.
This might work.
Wanted a smart and attractive...
A smart and attractive young girl...
to serve as a salesgirl.
Salesgirl?
- Hang on.
You wouldn't be hawking wares
out in the street!
To serve as a salesgirl...
in a respectable firm.
Must be a matriculate.
Starting salary:...
rupees 100.
You remember my starting salary?
All right.
What's that mean?
It means let's submit
an application.
I'll have one typed up at work,
and you'll sign it.
I'll sign it?
- Why not?
Me?
If you don't sign it, who will?
Lady Mountbatten?
Go away.
Do you write our last name in
English with a J or a Z?
Z, the first letter in zoo.
Who's going to the zoo?
Here.
I'll go get some paan (betel-leaf).
Who's going to the zoo?
You and Mommy...
and Daddy and Auntie.
When?
- Sunday after next.
That long away?
- Daddy's pockets are empty now.
Don't chew paan before
your interview.
Makes a bad impression. Understand?
Is there something wrong with red?
Listen.
No, never mind.
Tell me...
what if they call me
in for an interview?
Then you go.
- Yes, but...
But what?
What do I say here at home?
Say you're going to your
father's house.
It wouldn't be that far off.
A boss is like a father.
Both are providers.
All right?
I'm off.
Is your father home?
I told you to put life and not wife.
See? It was life.
I'm just a
- Take these.
You may have taught English,
but as they say...
common sense is the secret
to a crossword.
I only have a FA,
and you've an MA and BT.
But you still lost.
What's this all about?
It's checkered like a chessboard.
You've to fit in the
right English words.
You can win 7,000 rupees.
You know anybody who's won?
- People win all the time.
Whoever makes the fewest
mistakes wins...
and if it's a tie,
the prize is divided up.
What?
Another near miss!
Looks doubtful to me. Look at the...
G.S. N. Ganguly.
Doesn't he live on Heysham Row?
Let's call him.
You've approved his checks before.
Yes,
but never for such a large amount.
Hello.
A letter came.
- Already?
Yes. I've an interview Wednesday
at 10:00 a.m.
Very good.
Will you go with me?
Me?
Sit around with a bunch of women?
Won't you take me?
- We'll see. Where's the office?
Mission Row.
And the letter was signed
by a Mr. Mukherjee.
A Bengali!
The signature's very mature,
and the firm bears his name.
Very good.
Tell me...
- What?
Listen, I have clients waiting.
Forget your work for a moment.
So...
what kind of questions
will they ask?
They'll ask,
Where does the tree spirit live?
And you answer, In the treetops.
Here's your ticket.
It came.
(Radio news)
Didn't I tell you?
The interview was really long.
Where are you going?
- To see Baba.
Starting next month, right?
Why only 100 rupees?
It should have been more.
Even Dipti's driver
- - Hush.
What's that letter? I want to see.
Let me see.
What now?
First we have to bell the cat.
You mean Baba?
Here.
You want some tea?
Let me tackle this first.
Shouldn't we tell Ma too?
That's a minor obstacle.
Spray under the table too.
Look, now it's run out.
Now you deal with the mosquitoes
on your own.
What do you want?
Aarti got a job.
Who did?
- Aarti.
What did she get?
- A job.
She got a job?
Yes. She already accepted it.
It's a very good job.
I mean, with a very good firm.
She applied...
and went for an interview.
The appointment letter came today.
She starts next month.
It's a salesgirl position.
She'll make 100 rupees a month.
Salesgirl?
My daughter-in-law?
I'm trying to find a
part-time job too.
Then she'll quit.
I've thought about it a lot.
My salary alone isn't enough.
My daughter-in-law.
I suppose you'll Say...
you supported a large family
all by yourself...
and that Ma never had
to go out and work.
I'm not denying that.
But times have changed.
It's a new day, and we've to change.
We have to accept it.
Change comes by necessity.
We've no choice but
to take this step.
What does Ara say?
She took the job of
her own free will.
It wasn't a whim. She had to.
Once I get things straightened out,
she'll quit.
Ara has changed.
It couldn't be helped.
I suppose you've something
to say too.
Ever since we came here...
it's like we've become strangers.
Listen.
The cold war has begun.
I know.
You know how long it will last?
How long?
Till the day you get your
first month's pay...
and buy Baba a pair of glasses.
It would've been nice if
no one had objected.
I'm hurting so many people.
Are you upset?
Me?
I'm worried about one thing.
- What?
The girls I saw the day
of the interview...
all looked so fashionable.
So tip-top.
How can I go to work in
my tattered slippers?
Give me a list of what you
need to look fashionable.
I'll get an advance from the office.
All right?
Aarti's looking very nice today.
Don't I look nice every day?
She's fishing for a present from
your first month's pay.
You look nice too.
- No! Both of us?
Yes, because you're both eating
together for once.
Like a bride and groom
on their wedding day.
All right. You needn't go on.
Where's Pintu?
- Over there.
Pinto.
Pintu, sweetie?
You think he's mad?
- Go and see.
I'll go see.
Why just Pintu?
Someone else is mad too.
You know what Bernard Shaw
says about working women?
Forget it.
Are you angry?
Listen to me.
Go away.
I'll buy you a really nice toy.
- I don't want one!
Pintu, I'll buy you some nice toys.
Listen to me.
Pinto. Pinto.
Pintu, listen.
Don't be angry, sweetheart.
Listen to me. Pintu!
No, no, no! Just go away!
- Pintu!
If we don't go now...
the streetcar will be too crowded.
Let's go.
I'm going now, Ma.
Good-bye.
Come on.
Mother.
What toys?
Whatever you want, my child.
Son.
What are you thinking about...
smart and attractive?
What time is it?
9:30. Why?
It's Pintu's bath time.
Don't worry. He'll get his bath.
I know.
Are you nervous?
What's this?
Your hand's ice-cold!
How can this be?
It happened once before.
- When?
Our wedding day.
I'm more worried about
Pintu's mother...
than about Pintu.
Can you manage with all
this on your mind?
We'll see.
Hello.
I think we've interviews
on the same day.
What silly questions they ask?
Was that your boyfriend?
The one who waved back.
Your boyfriend?
No.
Oh I see. Your husband?
You know what this means. This ring?
It means I am engaged.
To be married.
Number six or is it number seven?
Mukherjee and Mukherjee.
Do you speak English?
A little.
Well, I can follow Bengali.
So I think we will
get along alright.
Mukherjee...
Hello.
I was here before.
I'm sort of busy now.
- Is the family all right?
Yes.
What have you come for?
To open an account?
That's what I had in mind...
but I'm concerned about
something I heard.
What's that?
About runs on a few banks recently.
That may be.
Bengalis love to spread rumors.
A rumor gets started about a bank...
and people panic.
Especially after that incident
with the Jagat Dhatri Bank.
If you're unsure,
don't open an account.
Wait a while.
- No, no.
If you say so,
I trust the position is sound.
Savings or current account?
- Savings.
I'm just hesitant...
because it's not very much.
After you've learned to use it,
your job would be...
to personally go door-to-door...
and market the machine.
The average household...
won't be able to afford the Autonit.
Your target is the upper-income
group.
Each of you'll have a zone to cover.
You must knock on every
door in your zone.
If you can meet the housewives,
show them this booklet...
talk to them,
and demonstrate the machine...
you'll be successful.
Now, you may ask...
is there any guarantee we'll
meet the lady of the house?
I'd say no, there is no guarantee.
But there's one thing I
must tell you clearly.
Nobody really likes canvassers.
One more thing.
In the afternoon,
just when housewives are resting...
canvassers knock...
and disturb their rest.
The women get angry...
and sometimes treat you badly.
This is all part of the job.
There's nothing you can do.
But it's not a good idea
to be too insistent...
and make a nuisance of yourselves.
But if you can get your
foot in the door...
and speak to the lady
of the house...
then with the qualities
of the Autonit...
and your skills of persuasion...
there's no reason why
a successful...
transaction shouldn't take place.
Mukherjee.
Yes?
Mrs. Mazumdar?
Hold on.
Are you Mrs. Mazumdar?
Are you telling the truth?
Hello?
Aarti?
- Yes.
No problem, right?
No. I have to go.
Listen.
- What?
Wait for me after work.
I'll come by for you.
Okay. I have to go.
Sir, is that you? How are you?
It's been ages.
Just look how you've grown!
Please come inside.
You've grown in both
fame and appearance.
I wouldn't have recognized
you on the street.
But I'd have recognized you.
Come sit down.
Have a seat on my throne.
You used to have glasses,
didn't you?
Yes, I did.
I lost them on the train
coming to Calcutta.
I haven't been able to
get new ones since.
I've often told my son...
My pupil is now a big
eye specialist.
Get me an appointment with him.
But he just doesn't listen to me.
Where do you live?
Close by, in Kalighat...
not far from the cremation
grounds by the Ganges...
so I'm ready for...
the Master's call.
Lots of boys from our class
are here in Calcutta now.
You remember Anupam?
Anupam Ray Choudhury?
He's a big barrister now.
Then there's Bibhash Chakravarty.
He's port commissioner now.
A good job.
Nobendu's a doctor.
They were all your pupils.
What's this, sir?
Why are your eyes watering?
What is it?
Pranab, I'm in dire straits.
I have no income...
no money.
Maybe so. But why get so upset?
You can't imagine...
how embarrassed I'm to
tell you all this.
You mustn't worry.
This is nothing.
You simply need glasses.
There's no shame in that.
They won't cost you anything.
After all, you have a claim on us.
You taught us our first lessons,
didn't you?
I wonder if the others
feel the same way.
I'm just repaying my
debt to my teacher.
All right?
Well said, my son.
Repaying my debt to my teacher.
Well said.
Yes?
No.
Is madam in?
- What do you want?
I'm here on business.
- Come in.
Please have a seat.
I'll tell madam.
Sit down.
So stupid.
Don't do it.
Bobu, come and say sorry.
- No, I won't.
Bobu.
- No, no, no.
You're being noisy again.
Don't you know someone's sick?
Go upstairs now.
Hello.
I've probably come at a bad time.
No, I'm sorry to keep you waiting.
Sit down.
Did you embroider this?
That was long ago.
I do very little of that now.
What can I do for you?
I represent a firm that
makes a machine...
Machine? Electrical?
- No, no.
Oh, a knitting machine. Very good.
You see, I've got little
children in the house.
You can knit with your own hands.
You can knit a sweater
in just about an hour.
Ma, Nicky wants you!
Sit with him for a minute, darling.
I'm coming.
My little one is sick.
What is it?
He has a constant cough...
and yesterday he developed a fever.
Have you tried homeopathy?
Sometimes it works rather...
Can this knit different patterns?
Yes, you can see a few in the back.
How much does it cost?
Don't worry about that.
You'd hardly notice it.
May I come give you a demonstration
one day?
Ma, Nicky won't listen to me!
Next Wednesday at the same time?
All right,
because until I actually see it...
Good. I'll be back next Wednesday.
I've heard about this machine...
but never seen it work.
Your name and address?
Mrs. Sinha, 8/7 Alipore Park Road.
At first I didn't understand.
The man said, please come in.
I'll tell my Wife.
So I followed him inside.
How was I to know?
Anyone else would have known.
You wouldn't have either!
What did he look like?
- Well...
Was he good-looking or not?
- I don't know. It was very dark.
Dark? At that time of day?
Maybe you were a bit disoriented.
The shutters were all closed.
It was a hot day.
Fine. Then what happened?
Then...
I just sat in the drawing room.
What a beautiful room!
On the floor was a...
Get to the point!
I'm getting there.
I sat and waited while
the man disappeared.
To get his wife.
- Right.
After some time...
he came back and sat
on the sofa near me.
Across from you or next to you?
Just keep quiet!
Didn't you ask where his wife was?
I kept thinking, she's coming,
she's coming...
but she didn't come
and didn't come...
and then the man...
What?
He just kept staring at me.
Was he smiling?
- Smiling?
I could barely stammer...
is your wife coming?
What a question!
Then what?
The man says...
What wife?
I'm a bachelor.
Good heavens!
What did you say?
Listen, listen.
Then he says...
And I don't see any
vermilion mark...
on your forehead either.
What did you say?
What happened?
I don't like that man.
- Why?
I don't think he likes me either.
Not after this.
What? No commission.
First he says no, not a paisa.
And then?
It's too soon to expect
a commission.
And something about
trading position...
and you can't tell about
business and all that.
Say it in Hindi.
- And then?
And then I started to fight.
And insist and said...
they gave 10% to the
girls at Magnum.
And we do the same kind
of work as they do.
So why shouldn't we get 10% too.
Damn it!
That's why we sent you.
- And then?
Then he came around a little...
and said, he has been thinking
about it. That big fat liar.
And said, not 10% but 5%.
Five percent?
Let me finish.
5% on the first five
machine we sell.
And then 10% on each one after that,
per month.
And we will get a commission
with the...
first month's salary on Monday.
Thank you.
- Thank you.
Oh yes.
Aarti, the boss wants to see you.
Me?
- Yes, you.
You've done so much for us,
we must get you some sweet-balls.
Mate sweet-balls.
Next Para.
We still hope that...
you will settle this account...
without further delay.
And thus save yourself...
the inconvenience...
and considerable cost...
of a legal action.
Yours faithfully.
That's all.
I will send this letter.
Miss Simmons was in here earlier.
I suppose she was acting
as your representative.
Right?
If you've some collective
grievance...
best to send one person...
instead of all of you
crowding in here.
I have no objection to that.
And if your demand is reasonable...
I have no problem with that.
But there's one thing
I don't understand.
There are five of you...
four Bengalis...
and one Anglo-Indian.
So why doesn't one of you
four represent the group?
Why must that Anglo-Indian
be your leader?
What qualities in her...
made you make her your
representative?
Do you think Miss Simmons
got you the commission...
due to some amazing
skill on her part?
That I lost to her?
That's not the case at all,
Mrs. Mazumdar.
I'd already decided to give
you a commission...
after a month or two.
So it's not as if Miss Simmons...
is somehow responsible.
I had to be a bit harsh with her...
because I don't like
insolent people.
If you'd brought this
proposal to me...
I know you'd have put
it very politely...
and there'd have been no argument.
Will you remember that
in the future?
If there's something to discuss,
you come.
Then all parties will benefit.
All right?
May I go?
- Yes, of course.
How do you like the work?
I like it.
- I like it too...
your work, that is.
Some customers have sent letters
praising your work.
Go on now.
Mrs. Mazumdar.
Sign here.
Would you knit my grandson a
sweater on your machine...
if I bring you the wool?
- Certainly.
Miss Simmons.
Thank you.
"Counting house, counting..."
Hey. He has given you such nice
new notes, and look at these.
All crumbled and dirty, and smelly.
Give me yours,
and I'll give you mine.
Don't be silly. I was only joking.
Take them.
Alright. You give me 5 and I'll give
you 5 dirty ones in exchange.
All right.
Thank you.
Happy now?
A little gift for you,
for being so nice.
What?
Take it.
It's a nice one. I haven't used it.
No. What would I do with it?
Use it stupid.
Why not? What's wrong with
using a little lipstick?
You put red here, red here.
Why not here?
I don't know how to use it.
Not too much. Just a little.
Alright. If you don't like it,
you can take it off.
Will got Indian book on sex,
you know. Famous one.
And said Indian girls used
to paint their lips.
Eyebrows,
fingernails and everything.
They all did. So why shouldn't you?
There. Now look.
Don't you like it? It's very nice.
Give me a tissue. - There'll be
trouble if I use my handkerchief.
And keep this.
It's good for business.
What's going on?
A pistol?
What's this?
- Open it and see.
Bani, come with me.
Take it.
Mother.
Daddy, wind this up for me.
On the bottom.
Did you spend your whole salary?
This is my salary...
and...
What's that?
- Commission.
Commission?
- That's right.
You didn't tell me about that!
Remember that Anglo-Indian
girl I told you about?
She fought with Mr. Himangshu
and got us all a commission.
Mr. Himangshu?
- Our boss.
Give me that.
Mr. Mukherjee.
And you know what the boss told me?
What?
I'm not telling.
He said...
I'm doing very good work.
Ma.
Some scented tobacco for you.
Is it the right kind?
I got paid today...
so I went shopping.
That's why I was late.
WW buy anything for me?
Don't say that, Ma.
You mustn't think you've to
buy me anything special.
Your father-in-law's an old man now.
He's devoted his whole
life to studying...
and teaching children.
Now he has no job.
Take care of him.
That's enough for me.
Today is Baba's birthday.
- That's right.
If he's happy, so am I.
I got paid today, Baba.
I brought you some fruit.
Today's your birthday.
Leave the fruit,
but I won't take your money.
I'd be happy if you would.
No, Aarti, you can't change
my mind so easily.
And I'm too old to change my views.
Do what makes you happy.
I won't stand in your way.
But don't try to make me
share in your happiness.
I can't.
I'll leave the fruit.
Mommy.
Yes, sweetheart?
Baba won't look at my toys.
Go try again. I'm sure he'll look.
Listen...
where did Baba get those glasses?
Glasses?
The ones I saw on his table.
They must be Mr. Sinha's.
Where else would he get glasses?
Really?
What else could it be?
Maybe so.
I'm just tired of thinking.
Has peace been declared?
- No.
I'll have a bath today.
Will we ever get a fan?
We can afford one in a month or so,
don't you think?
At the rate you're earning
commissions, why just a fan?
We'll soon be able to afford
an air conditioner.
I told Mr. Himangshu today...
I'm scared to come into your office.
It's so cool,
I'm afraid I'll catch a cold!
You know what he said?
- What?
You ladies have knitting
machines now.
Knit yourselves some sweaters
to wear in my office.
Sounds like a very jovial fellow.
Yes...
but he's very strict too.
He won't tolerate any
slackness on the job.
If we're lax, he really scolds us.
I'll have to come meet him sometime.
Then stop in.
We leave the office at 10:30.
Find some excuse to call
on him after that.
Does he ever scold you?
Me?
My work is always faultless.
What exactly is your work?
I'll tell you.
I get to the office at 10:00...
and sign in.
Then we decide what area we'll
each cover that day.
At 10:30 sharp we start
out canvassing.
We go from door to door...
talking to housewives...
and setting appointments with them.
Then we go back with the machine...
and give them a demonstration.
Then, when the machine is sold...
there's the payment,
the invoice, the sales report...
The commission.
You wouldn't recognize
me on the job.
What about at home?
Would I recognize you at home?
You don't recognize me?
Tell me honestly.
Why not?
It all feels a bit unfamiliar.
It feels a bit...
What about this?
You don't recognize my mole?
I'm still the same housewife.
Yes.
Manoj?
It's Subrata.
I thought you'd forgotten
all about me.
No,
I don't forget you when I need you.
What do you need?
I need a favor...
that is, if you're a friend in need.
Tell me about this favor
and this need.
They come to the same thing.
I need a job.
A job? For whom?
- For me.
Don't you have a job?
- Yes...
but I mean in addition to that.
Anything part-time that
pays 70-75 rupees.
You know so many people.
I could use a little help.
Who said you can get a
job over the phone?
No, this is just a warning.
I'll stop by.
Then hang up and come straight over.
It's already lunch time.
Make a little effort.
Pamper me a bit.
Sure, but not today. Tomorrow.
You think there's a chance?
I can't guarantee you a job...
but I've got some good
American cigarettes...
fresh off the boat.
Sounds good. I'll stop by.
Talk to you later.
Pintu.
Pintu has a fever.
A fever?
Yes. We've been waiting for you.
In here.
Your mommy's here.
When did it start?
- This afternoon.
He kept saying he didn't
want to eat.
Mommy's home now.
Let's go to our room.
He said he's not talking to you.
Let's go.
You're not talking to me?
What?
I told him to go play
with his auntie.
Come, child.
Then he suddenly just
lay down on the bed.
Then I understood.
I felt his forehead,
and he was warm.
He had some milk and
barley this evening.
All day long it was, Mommy, Mommy.
When is Mommy coming home?
Why does she have to go to work?
Mommy's mean.
Mommy's naughty.
I'm going to spank her.
And on and on.
So You're very angry are you? '
You're going to hit Mommy
with your pistol?
What if Mommy brings you a new toy?
What toy?
What toy? We'll have to see.
Let me wash up first.
Shall we take him to the clinic?
Is it a high fever?
No, maybe 100.
Shall I go borrow a thermometer?
Yes. Tell them we'll return
it in the morning.
Get me a really good toy.
The streetcars weren't running.
Did you take a bus?
Quit your job.
I'm getting a part-time job.
I called a friend today.
He promised to help.
You'd be working twice as hard.
That' s what we deemed, Ara.
I'd get a part-time job,
and you'd quit working.
But...
- No buts.
I've given this a lot of thought.
Did you think about the money?
Peace within the family is
more important than money.
Mommy, what toy?
- I'll tell you in a minute.
You realize Baba hasn't
spoken to me...
in a month and a half?
I'm setting it here.
I'm doing such good work.
Is that bothering you?
You know what your good
work has done?
What?
You're looking thin.
There are dark circles
under your eyes.
I don't feel bad.
Even after working all day,
I don't feel tired.
You really don't want me...
to work?
No, I don't.
And Baba doesn't. Ma doesn't.
Even he doesn't.
You'd rather go on making
so many others unhappy?
It's not the others that concern me.
What matters is what you want.
Mommy, what toy?
97.8.
Is that a fever?
Silly! You think 98 is a fever?
Then what is? Two hundred?
Pintu's fever is gone.
Should I return the thermometer?
Yes, do.
Do I get a toy even
if my fever's gone?
Of course, darling. Now go lie down.
Here.
Sign this.
Finding a job is hard...
but quitting one is easy.
All it takes is a letter.
There's some trouble at your bank,
sir.
You should go see. There is a crowd.
What?
Good morning.
Since you were late, I...
One minute.
Don't go any closer.
The crowd is furious.
Me?
Mukherjee. Oh, how are you?
230.
All right.
Thank you, brother. Thank you.
Now, then...
first, your colleague Miss Simmons
isn't coming in today.
She had a demonstration scheduled
for today at 12:00.
It's a good prospect.
You'll have to handle it.
If you can manage English, fine.
Otherwise, use Hindi.
Jewish lady. Mrs. Koi.
All right?
Second...
I have some plans.
Not immediately,
but in the near future.
Open the doors!
There's the scoundrel!
Come to watch the fun?
Get him!
We're ruined thanks to you!
- What did I do?
Now the scoundrel's making excuses!
Why are you hitting him?
Will it get you your money back?
We'll be taking on some
new salesgirls...
so the nature of your
job may change a bit.
But I
- - Mrs. Mazumdar...
I don't like the word but...
it's a very ugly word.
I'm banking on you.
I'd like you to take on
more responsibility.
You can handle it.
I've seen your work these
last two months.
I want to start working
in a group system...
and I want you to be group leader.
You'd no longer have
to go door-to-door.
You'd simply coordinate
the others' work...
supervise them...
collect the daily sales reports.
You'll manage the day-to-day
expenses.
But Mr. Mukherjee...
Mukherjee.
I've told you before.
- For me?
I won't take no for an answer.
Hello.
- Did you give him the letter?
No, not yet...
Don't. I lost my job.
The bank collapsed.
Don't give him the letter.
I'll explain tonight.
Don't be scared.
Everything will be fine.
Don't worry. I've got to go.
I wrote it down.
Mrs. Benjamin Cohen,
24 Royad Street, 12:00.
Okay?
What is it?
Mrs. Mazumdar?
That call earlier was
from my husband.
Yes, I guessed that.
- He lost his job.
What?
- There was no warning.
Where? What was he doing?
The New Bharat Bank.
It's closed down.
All these banks sprouting up
- - I need a raise.
Didn't you say my work was good...
and my future bright?
At least a 50-rupee raise.
I can't manage without it.
Mrs. Mazumdar...
there's no doubt about
your efficiency.
That's why I'm giving you
greater responsibility.
But not immediately.
It will take two or three months.
There's a process involved in
raises, and you've only...
I can't manage without
a 50-rupee raise.
Or I'll have to explore
other avenues.
What other avenues, Mrs. Mazumdar?
Are there so many just waiting
for you to explore?
I'm asking you: Please
see what you can do.
Mrs. Mazumdar...
you are too impulsive...
and impulsiveness can
lead to trouble.
I know, and I apologize.
Very well. I'll give instructions
to Nagen Babu.
But in the strictest confidence.
Your colleagues must
never know of this.
No one will know. I give my word.
One more thing: Tell your husband...
not to get a job with another
upstart bank...
or I'll have to go through
this again.
This is unbelievable.
You were in charge
of a department...
yet you'd no warning
of such a disaster?
You had me open an account there.
Position sound, you said.
Where's that position sound now?
Two thousand rupees gone
down the drain!
I'll pay back your money over time.
That's not the point.
It's not the money.
Two thousand rupees won't
ruin Nibaron Chatterjee.
I'm thinking of you.
If a run was imminent...
there was a manager and others...
you could've discussed things with.
They're the ones who said
the position was sound...
not me.
You can't just bury your
nose in your papers.
You have to be sharp and alert.
These aren't simple times.
What do you think?
Nothing. My opinion is of no value.
I'm outdated now.
Daughter...
I never thought you'd have
to suffer like this.
Suffer like what, Baba?
I'm very disappointed, child.
This is...
Don't worry, Baba.
This isn't anybody's fault.
He didn't do anything wrong.
He just has to find another job.
I understand that.
But to make you go out and work?
No one made me go out and work.
It was my own decision...
and I enjoy it very much.
But now you're the only one...
Go back inside, Baba.
Your tea's getting cold.
Sister-in-law.
What's this?
Have my name removed.
From where?
- The school rolls.
Have you lost your mind?
You've done well and gotten
such good grades.
Why quit school now?
It's too big an expense for you.
Poor thing.
What would you do then?
Can't I work?
Giving you that sari was a mistake.
You're still just a child.
Then tell me what I should do.
Will you do what I say?
The potatoes,
eggplants, and pumpkin...
are chopped and ready
in the kitchen.
Add the spices and make a curry.
Go on.
I can make the curry?
But I won't help. Ma won't help.
No one will help.
You won't criticize it later,
will you?
No, I won't. Go on.
I went to see that friend today...
who talked about a part-time job.
What happened?
He says it'll take a month at least.
Shall I tell you some good news?
Good news?
I got a 50-rupee raise.
That's great.
The wife's a hero...
the husband's a zero.
Someone's here to see you.
Who?
- Some old man. He's waiting.
All right.
Don't be too long.
The show's at 10:30.
I'm all ready.
- I know, I know.
How are you, sir?
Anupam?
Let me have a look at you.
Have I changed a lot?
No, I recognize you.
Please sit down.
So what brings you here?
I got your letter when I got
back from court yesterday.
Who gave you my address?
- Your address?
The man who gave me these glasses...
one of your old classmates.
Pranab?
- Yes.
Do you see him often?
Yes. I saw him for a consultation
a while back.
I see.
- His practice is going well.
Yours isn't going badly either,
my boy.
This age belongs to all of you.
It's you who work...
and make our country's
future bright.
When I see your achievements...
the heart under this old
bag of bones rejoices.
I trust your health is fine?
My health?
My generation is no more.
We are dead,
crushed into the dust...
like reptiles.
The backbone's broken, my boy.
If we're still here today...
it's only due to our
mental strength.
It's very hard.
If my own son doesn't
look after me...
I know you will.
After all, you're like my own sons.
I raised you like my own sons.
If you're famous today...
some credit should go to me.
Didn't I contribute to that?
Tell me.
Are you speaking of financial help?
I prefer not to use the word help.
Did Dronacharya
ask Eklavya for help?
Wait here. I'll be right back.
I suppose he's asking for help.
The Bengali community is like that.
Who is he?
Our old teacher.
He used to quote Samuel Smiles.
- How much are you giving him?
Oh! I thought it was a hundred.
You must be crazy.
I don't need any fish, Ma.
No need to rush.
It's ready, child.
Here you are.
I have to be at work by 9:30.
The Anglo-Indian girl's been
out for a few days...
so I have to do her work too.
That's what I'm saying.
You work all day.
If you don't eat well,
how will you manage?
Sister-in-law.
Did you try the spinach?
- Yes.
HOW did I do?
You passed.
Just passed?
First division.
Should we keep the maid
on or let her go?
How would you manage the whole day?
You can see how busy I am.
I get home so late every night.
It's just that she's been asking
for the rest of her wages.
Oh. In that case...
Listen, you're not doing anything.
Could you get four rupees from
the dresser for the maid?
Where's the money?
- In my bag.
In the drawer on the right.
No office again today?
No.
- Why?
I have the day off.
Mommy doesn't get the day off?
Mommy's office is bad.
- Mommy's office is bad?
Did you find it?
There's a 10-rupee bill...
and seven one-rupee bills.
They're all together.
Here.
Listen.
Where did she go now?
Sister.
I'm late.
I've been calling you forever.
Here's your pay.
Where did you run off to?
Mommy,
Daddy says your office is bad.
Is that so?
I'm off now.
I'm going.
Not going to put on your lipstick?
Mommy, what did you throw?
Listen to me.
What?
Do whatever you like...
but please don't misunderstand me,
darling.
Daddy, is Mommy mad?
Edith.
- Coming, Mummy.
Hello. What a surprise! Come in.
I found her waiting downstairs.
Mom, this is Aarti.
She has got the same boss as mine.
She has told me a lot about you.
Come.
How are you?
- I'm fine. Sit down.
Have you taken your temperature,
darling? - No, mom. I'm alright.
What happened?
Oh. This is terrible.
Remember the shower
we'd on Friday.
Would you like cold drink?
No.
A glass of water?
- Yes.
Remember the shower
we'd on Friday?
They'd to play against
East Bengal.
I had gone to watch.
I think it was 5 or 5 past,
when the shower came.
And m why God. It just kept pouring
and pouring and pouring.
I got completely soaked.
Influenza?
Well, yes, but such high fever.
Yes. 104 on Sunday.
She wept like a child.
Oh mom.
But you're all right now?
- Yes.
I missed Jennifer's party and...
I was so scared. I thought I'd
pneumonia or something.
Try it?
And now I've to do all your work.
- What work?
Didn't you schedule a demonstration
today? Isn't this Thursday?
Oh my God. This is a goner.
And where was it yesterday?
Short street.
Something vendor. That Parsi lady.
Oh, Aarti. I am so sorry.
Don't say sorry. Say thank you.
You'll get the commission.
Alright.
I will give you 5% of my 5%. Okay?
And don't you've a sales
report to turn in?
It's ready. It's in my bag.
Here.
I will bring it in tomorrow.
You'll be in tomorrow?
I must.
I haven't got my wages yet, damn it.
They came for the lunch
this morning...
and I told them to come on Saturday.
That's alright, mom.
Here.
What's that?
Your pay...
Oh, Aarti. Thank you so much.
Here, sign for it.
How sweet of you!
Sign it.
Try and come in tomorrow.
Alright. Turn in the sales report
yourself. The boss will be happy.
Okay, I will think I will do that.
I'll be going.
- All right.
Thanks for coming.
Say good-bye to your mother for me.
Wait a minute.
I've got something for you.
5% of my 5%. Take it.
Take them.
I don't use them. I got a new pair.
No.
- Take it. Put them on.
There.
That's their advantage.
The problem is the population.
And the solution is family planning.
It's better be a bachelor.
Right.
1000 years.
He is telling the truth.
That's fine.
You thought I was just out shopping?
Naturally.
That was my first impression.
Sit down.
What will you have?
Tea.
- Nothing else?
Two teas, please.
So you're a salesgirl, eh?
Don't laugh. It's a good job.
And we make a good product.
- Is that so?
Look.
You've to buy one.
- What? It's compulsory?
Why not?
Since you're the husband
of a rich friend.
Autonit.
For your wife, of course.
Knitting machine.
Washing machine. Okay?
Soon women will have no
work to do at all.
How is Shipra?
You still haven't come by our place.
And I've yet to meet your husband.
I hardly see him myself.
Really? Why?
He's addicted to his work.
He works a 12-hour day.
He's gone by 8:00 a.m.
And isn't home till 8:00 p.m.
Is he an employee,
or is it his own business?
His own business.
Import-export.
He's responsible for everything.
Set it up all by himself too.
- Very good.
I insisted on working just for fun.
Otherwise he wouldn't have let me.
If you work,
people will say I don't make enough.
I see.
I said, why?
Everyone knows how much you make.
He finally said, all right,
but just for six months.
There's just one month left.
Then I'll quit.
My sense of direction is a bit weak.
Take a right here.
- Right.
All right.
Especially the Kalighat area.
I've put you to a lot of trouble.
When I see that the streetcars
aren't running...
I give a lift to anyone
I see on the road.
To tell you the truth...
when I see the plight
of pedestrians...
I feel very guilty sometimes.
I'd quite an argument about
this with my wife.
Why?
She said I mustn't stop for everyone
I see in the street.
When I asked why, she said...
How do you know they're not
carrying infectious germs?
Disinfect the car or
I won't ride in it.
She's crazy.
Please forgive my saying so,
Mrs. Mazumdar...
but women get these obsessions.
She's obsessed with germs.
Three bottles of
sanitizers per month.
Bhombol...
did Aarti say she'd be late?
No, she didn't say anything to me.
She's never been this late.
There's a car outside. Go and see.
Bhombol.
Bhombol, are you there?
God!
What happened?
Please lie down slowly, sir.
Oh.
What happened?
Don't be upset.
It's nothing to worry about.
He felt a bit sick,
so he came to my office.
He got dizzy on the stairs and fell.
He walked a lot in the sun...
and has blood pressure problems too.
But there's no need to worry.
I've written him a prescription...
and he must have complete rest.
Look after him, all right?
I keep telling you not
to go out so much.
Have a seat.
- No, I have to rush.
Sir, I'll be leaving now.
Don't behave like a little child,
all right?
I see.
Remember, complete bed rest.
I'm a former pupil of his.
I haven't seen him in 25 years.
Right, sir?
I'm afraid the circumstances
weren't...
I have to be going.
May I have a word?
I'm not asking for payment...
but there's something
I've to tell you.
I've a feeling you're
all neglecting him.
Otherwise,
with a grown son like you...
there's no reason for him...
to be out searching for
a doctor on his own.
I know it's none of my business,
but I'd to tell you.
Well, I'll be going.
Horne.
No, wait.
I'd never have found this
place on my own.
Come.
Thank you very much.
- Not at all.
Would you like to...
Not today.
Some other time,
if I can remember the way.
What happened?
Is that Aarti?
I've warned him so often about
wandering the streets...
but he never listens.
What if you'd hurt your
head or something?
My glasses broke.
The ones Pranab gave me.
What happened?
On his way to see a doctor,
he felt dizzy and fell.
Good heavens!
How are you now, Baba?
I've sinned too much
to die just yet.
Don't say that, Baba.
I feel no pain physically...
but my thoughts...
are very disturbed.
Try not to talk too much.
I said bad things about you, Aarti.
I said...
you'd changed.
But you know what I did?
I went around to my pupils...
and spoke ill of my own son.
I said...
he wasn't looking after me...
that you look after me.
Now you must decide my punishment,
Aarti.
Whatever it is...
I'll accept it.
You know your punishment?
You've to take all your
medications...
and I'll administer them.
You're too lenient, daughter-in-law.
He will never make a good teacher.
He will never.
Listen...
I've only been late
the last few days.
It doesn't happen every day,
does it?
No.
You always have the Austin.
It's just in the shop
for a few days.
No, why?
I'll send the other car for you.
In an hour.
Do your shopping then come
by my office around 5:30.
Yes, my office.
Not even one minute. Promise.
All right. But...
How many busy executives...
would do so much for their wives?
Okay.
I've come...
I recognize you.
Aren't you Aarti Debt's husband?
Unless I'm very much mistaken.
Yes, but...
There was a snapshot of you
in your wife's purse.
It fell out when she took
out a sales report.
It was taken at the zoo,
in front of a camel...
No, a giraffe.
- Giraffe - that's it!
Your memory is really...
- Not at all.
I saw the name Mazumdar
on my schedule...
and I've heard your
voice on the phone.
I imagine Aarti's out right now.
Yes, they leave by 10:30.
If you'd come a bit earlier...
Then I'll be going.
- No, please don't.
A tea, please.
What's the hurry?
You're free these days, right?
Well, yes...
You're originally from Pabna.
You see, I keep abreast of things.
What village?
The town of Pabna itself.
I'm from Sirajganj.
We're birds of a feather.
Your office is very nice.
How's your wife enjoying the job?
She enjoys it,
but it's causing a bit of strain.
But that's only recently.
- She gets home quite late.
You see, the thing is...
she has this Anglo-Indian colleague.
I shouldn't say this...
but our ex-rulers left
behind quite a clan!
The girl's been absent for a
few days. Says she's sick.
The truth may be something
else entirely.
But your wife's had to take
on her workload too.
Otherwise there'd be no question
of overstraining.
But I must say one
thing about her...
Of course,
there's no need to tell you.
After all you know her
much better than I do.
But she is very efficient.
The day of your mishap...
she immediately pressured
me for a raise.
In that sense she's certainly
a bit impulsive...
but I couldn't refuse her.
With a conscientious worker...
you sometimes have to meet
their additional demands.
At least,
that's the principle I thought.
Please.
Have you ever thought about
a husband and wife...
working in the same office?
No, I can't say
- - I have...
and I don't approve.
So if I'm to do anything for you...
it has to be somewhere else.
I didn't come here for a job.
Don't you need a job?
Yes, of course.
Then where's the problem?
That's very kind of you.
This isn't about kindness, sir.
I have a job and you don't.
It so happens I might have some
influence that you don't.
The most important thing...
is that we're both from Pabna.
Couldn't be simpler.
Do one thing for me.
Come see me again this
evening around 5:00.
Would that be a problem?
- No.
In the meantime,
I'll make a few calls, okay?
Let's go.
Should I tell your wife you came by?
No, you needn't tell her.
Good afternoon, sir.
I brought these.
- Sit down.
I want to talk to you.
I don't want to hear another
word from you.
Edith?
What's going on?
Here. Read this.
What am I going to tell Phil?
He fired you?
You saw me? You came to my house.
You saw I was ill.
He doesn't believe you?
No. He thinks I was having fun.
That dirty filthy mind. Son of a...
Here.
What did you say to Edith?
Did you insult her...
or say something about
her character?
Did you come to fight with me
about that Anglo-Indian girl?
What did you say to Edith?
Don't get so excited, Mrs. Mazumdar.
You didn't insult her?
Whether I did or not...
I don't have to tell you,
Mrs. Mazumdar.
You know nothing about her...
and still you insulted her?
You dismissed her?
Look, Mrs. Mazumdar...
what I do or what I tell...
employees in my office...
It's my business. And mine alone.
Edith may be your employee...
but I've worked with her...
for four months.
She's my friend.
I know her. I've been to her house.
I saw with my own eyes
that she was sick.
I don't know how friendly
you're with Miss Simmons.
But may I ask you...
how much you know...
about Anglo-Indian girls?
I don't know any other
Anglo-Indian girls...
but I do know Edith.
And I can tell you...
she doesn't deserve to be insulted.
I didn't insult her!
She got what she deserved.
The day I realized that a Bengali
girl, meaning you...
Why can't you understand I
fired her for your sake?
When I realized you could handle
her job, I decided to fire her.
Only my sense of obligation
kept her here this long.
Why are you interfering?
What do you gain?
You're jeopardizing
your own position.
Would your friend do
the same for you?
You've gone mad.
You've no right to say anything
about her character...
especially when it isn't true.
It's injustice, and it's wrong.
Mrs. Mazumdar...
your words...
would be more apt coming from
my side of this desk...
not yours.
You're overstepping your bounds.
I think...
you should apologize to her.
Will you do that?
Will you?
Mrs. Mazumdar,
you don't understand that...
I am busy now.
You don't understand...
that your attitude could've
serious consequences.
You won't apologize?
If you lose your job, what then?
Then...
I'd be very happy...
Here.
- What's that?
My resignation. Change the date.
Mrs. Mazumdar.
Aarti.
What's going on?
Don't be angry.
Don't misunderstand me.
Everyone else will misunderstand.
Don't you too.
But what happened?
I quit my job...
You quit?
Mr. Himangshu fired
Edith for no reason.
She'd done nothing wrong,
but he wouldn't listen.
Now she can't get married.
I felt so bad for her.
It seemed like such a gross
injustice that I...
You're angry.
I can tell you're angry.
Who can I turn to now?
Aarti...
Don't cry.
I'm not angry, you hear?
I'm not angry...
though I can't be too happy either.
You know our situation.
I know. I made a big mistake.
Don't say that.
Listen to me.
You stood up to injustice.
Was that wrong?
I could never have
done what you did.
I wouldn't have had the courage.
Earning our daily bread
has made us cowards.
But you weren't a coward.
Is that a small achievement?
Why should I be angry with you?
I feel scared. Very scared.
Why? I'm by your side.
You're by my side?
- Where else?
You moved so far away from me.
Don't go any further.
Aarti, don't cry.
This is the time to be strong.
How will we manage
if you break down?
Don't cry.
Aarti.
Such a big city.
So many different jobs.
Surely one of us can find a job.
Let's try.
I'm sure we both will.
You know...
even facing this difficult moment...
not knowing what fate
has in store...
I feel very happy.
You're not scared anymore?
Feel.
Shall we?
- Yes.